1 § 4.1.1 EPIRUS : The third great Gulf of Europe begins at the mountains of Acroceraunia , and ends at the Hellespont , embracing an extent of 2500 miles , exclusive of the sea-line of nineteen smaller gulfs .
2 Upon it are Epirus , Acarnania , Aitolia , Phocis , Locris , Achaia , Messenia , Laconia , Argolis , Megaris , Attica , Boeotia ; and again , upon the other sea , the same Phocis and Locris , Doris , Phthiotis , Thessalia , Magnesia , Macedonia and Thracia .
3 All the fabulous lore of Greece , as well as the effulgence of her literature , first shone forth upon the banks of this Gulf .
4 We shall therefore dwell a little the longer upon it .
5 § 4.1.2 Epirus , generally so called , begins at the mountains of Acroceraunia .
6 The first people that we meet are the Chaones , from whom Chaonia receives its name , then the Thesproti , and then the Antigonenses .
7 We then come to the place where Aornos stood , with its exhalations so deadly to the feathered race , the Cestrinis , the Perrhaebi , in whose country Mount Pindus is situate , the Cassiopaei , the Dryopes , the Sellae , the Hellopes , the Molossi , in whose territory is the temple of the Dodonaean Jupiter , so famous for its oracle ; and Mount Tomarus , so highly praised by Theopompus , with its hundred springs gushing from its foot .
8 § 4.1.3 Epirus , properly so called , advances towards Magnesia and Macedonia , having at its back the Dassaretae , previously mentioned , a free nation , and after them the Dardani , a savage race .
9 On the left hand , before the Dardani are extended the Triballi and the nations of Moesia , while in front of them the Medi and the Denselatae join , and next to them the Thracians , who stretch away as far as the Euxine : in such a manner is a rampart raised around the lofty heights of Rhodope , and then of Haemus .
10 § 4.1.4 On the coast of Epirus is the fortress of Chimaer , situate upon the Acroceraunian range , and below it the spring known as the Royal Waters ; then the towns of Maeandria , and Cestria , the Thyamis , a river of Thesprotia , the colony of Buthrotum , and the Ambracian Gulf , so famed in history ; which , with an inlet only half a mile in width , receives a vast body of water from the sea , being thirty-seven miles in length , and fifteen in width .
11 The river Acheron , which runs through Acherusia , a lake of Thesprotia , flows into it after a course of thirty-six miles ; it is considered wonderful for its bridge , 1000 feet in length , by a people who look upon everything as wonderful that belongs to themselves .
12 Upon this Gulf is also situate the town of Ambracia .
13 There are also the Aphas and the Arachthus , rivers of the Molossi ; the city of Anactoria , and the place where Pandosia stood .
14 § 4.2.1 ACARNANIA : The towns of Acarnania , the ancient name of which was Curetis , are Heraclia , Echinus , and , on the coast , Actium , a colony founded by Augustus , with its famous temple of Apollo and the free city of Nicopolis .
15 Passing out of the Ambracian Gulf into the Ionian Sea , we come to the coast of Leucadia , with the Promontory of Leucate , and then the Gulf and the peninsula of Leucadia , which last was formerly called Neritis .
16 By the exertions of the inhabitants it was once cut off from the mainland , but was again joined to it by the vast bodies of sand accumulated through the action of the winds .
17 This spot is called Dioryctos , and is three stadia in length : on the peninsula is the town of Leucas , formerly called Neritus .
18 We next come to Alyzia , Stratos , and Argos , surnamed Amphilochian , cities of the Acarnanians : the river Achelous flows from the heights of Pindus , and , after separating Acarnania from Aitolia , is fast adding the island of Artemita to the mainland by the continual deposits of earth which it brings down its stream .
19 § 4.3.1 AETOLIA : The peoples of Aitolia are the Athamanes , the Tymphaei , the Ephyri , the Aenienses , the Perrhaebi , the Dolopes , the Maraces , and the Atraces , in whose territory rises the river Atrax , which flows into the Ionian Sea .
20 Calydon is a city of Aitolia , situate at a distance of seven miles from the sea , and near the banks of the river Evenus .
21 We then come to Macynia , and Molycria , behind which lie Mounts Chalcis and Taphiassus .
22 On the coast again , there is the promontory of Antirrhium , off which is the mouth of the Corinthian Gulf , which flows in and separates Aitolia from the Peloponnesus , being less than one mile in width .
23 The promontory which faces it on the opposite side is called Rhion .
24 The towns of Aitolia , however , on the Corinthian Gulf are Naupactus and Pylene ; and , more inland , Pleuron and Halicyrna .
25 The most famous mountains are Tomarus , in the district of Dodona , Crania in Ambracia , Aracynthus in Acarnania , and Acanthon , Panaetolium , and Macynium , in Aitolia .
26 § 4.4.1 LOCRIS AND PHOCIS : Next to Aitolia are the Locri surnamed Ozolae ; a people exempt from tribute .
27 Here is the town of Oianthe , the port of Apollo Phaestius , and the Gulf of Crissa .
28 In the interior are the towns of Argyna , Eupalia , Phaestum , and Calamisus .
29 Beyond are the Cirrhaean plains of Phocis , the town of Cirrha , and the port of Chalaeon , seven miles from which , in the interior , is situate the free town of Delphi , at the foot of Mount Parnassus , and having the most celebrated oracle of Apollo throughout the whole world .
30 There is the Fountain too of Castalia , and the river Cephisus which flows past Delphi , rising in the former city of Lilaea .
31 Besides these , there is the town of Crissa and that of Anticyra , with the Bulenses ; as also Naulochum , Pyrrha , Amphissa , exempt from all tribute , Tithrone , Tritea , Ambrysus , and Drymaea , which district has also the name of Daulis .
32 The extremity of the gulf washes one corner of Boeotia , with its towns of Siphae and Thebes , surnamed the Corsian , in the vicinity of Helicon .
33 The third town of Boeotia on this sea is that of Pagae , from which point the Isthmus of the Peloponnesus projects in the form of a neck .
34 § 4.5.1 THE PELOPONNESUS : The Peloponnesus , which was formerly called Apia and Pelasgia , is a peninsula , inferior in fame to no land upon the face of the earth .
35 Situate between the two seas , the Aegean and the Ionian , it is in shape like the leaf of a plane-tree , in consequence of the angular indentations made in its shores .
36 According to Isidorus , it is 563 miles in circumference ; and nearly as much again , allowing for the sea-line on the margin of its gulfs .
37 The narrow pass at which it commences is known by the name of the Isthmus .
38 At this spot the two seas , which we have previously mentioned , running from the north and the east , invade the land from opposite sides , and swallow up its entire breadth , the result being that through these inroads in opposite directions of such vast bodies of water , the sides of the land are eaten away to such an extent , that Hellas only holds on to the Peloponnesus by the narrow neck , five miles in width , which intervenes .
39 The Gulfs thus formed , the one on this side , the other on that , are known as the Corinthian and the Saronic Gulfs .
40 The ports of Lecheae , on the one side , and of Cenchreae on the other , form the frontiers of this narrow passage , which thus compels to a tedious and perilous circumnavigation such vessels as from their magnitude cannot be carried across by land on vehicles .
41 For this reason it is that both King Demetrius , Caesar the Dictator , the prince Caius , and Domitius Nero , have at different times made the attempt to cut through this neck by forming a navigable canal ; a profane design , as may be clearly seen by the result in every one of these instances .
42 § 4.5.2 Upon the middle of this intervening neck which we have called the Isthmus , stands the colony of Corinth , formerly known by the name of Ephyre , situate upon the brow of a hill , at a distance of sixty stadia from the shore of either sea .
43 From the heights of its citadel , which is called Acrocorinthus , or the " Heights of Corinth ," and in which is the Fountain of Pirene , it looks down upon the two seas which lie in the opposite directions .
44 From Leucas to Patrae upon the Corinthian gulf is a distance of eighty-eight miles .
45 The colony of Patrae is founded upon the most extensive promontory of the Peloponnesus , facing Aitolia and the river Evenus , the Corinthian Gulf being , as we have previously stated , less than a mile in width at the entrance there , though extending in length as far as the isthmus , a distance of eighty-five miles .
46 § 4.6.1 ACHAIA : The province called Achaia begins at the Isthmus ; from the circumstance of its cities being ranged in regular succession on its coast , it formerly had the name of Aegialos .
47 The first place there is Lecheae , already mentioned , a port of the Corinthians ; next to which is Olyros , a fortress of the people of Pellene ; then the former towns of Helice and Bura , and the places in which their inhabitants took refuge after their towns had been swallowed up by the sea , Sikyon namely , Aegira , Aegium , and Erineos .
48 In the interior are Kleonai and Hysiae ; then come the port of Panormus , and Rhium already mentioned ; from which promontory , Patrae , of which we have previously spoken , is distant five miles ; and then the place where Pherae stood .
49 Of the nine mountains of Achaia , Scioessa is the most famous ; there is also the Fountain of Cymothoe .
50 Beyond Patrae we find the town of Olenum , the colony of Dyme , the places where Buprasium and Hyrmine once stood , the Promontory of Araxus , the Bay of Cyllene , and the Promontory of Chelonates , at five miles' distance from Cyllene .
51 There is also the fortress of Phlious [ Pheia ?] ; the district around which was called by Homer Araethyrea , and , after his time , Asopis .
52 § 4.6.2 The territory of the Eleans then begins , who were formerly called Epei , with the city of Elis in the interior , and , at a distance of twelve miles from Phlious [ Pylos , Pheia ?] , being also in the interior , the temple of Olympian Jupiter , which by the universal celebrity of its games , gives to Greece its mode of reckoning .
53 Here too once stood the town of Pisa , the river Alpheus flowing past it .
54 On the coast there is the Promontory of Ichthys .
55 The river Alpheus is navigable six miles , nearly as far as the towns of Aulon and Leprion .
56 We next come to the Promontory of Platanodes .
57 All these localities lie to the west .
58 § 4.7.1 MESSENIA : Further south is the Gulf of Cyparissus , with the city of Cyparissa on its shores , the line of which is seventy-two miles in length .
59 Then , the towns of Pylos and Methone , the place where Helos stood , the Promontory of Acritas , the Asinaean Gulf , which takes its name from the town of Asine , and the Coronean , so called from Corone ; which gulfs terminate at the Promontory of Taenarum .
60 These are all in the country of Messenia , which has eighteen mountains , and the river Pamisus also .
61 In the interior are Messene , Ithome , Oichalia , Arene , Pteleon , Thryon , Dorion , and Zancle , all of them known to fame at different periods .
62 The margin of this gulf measures eighty miles , the distance across being thirty .
63 § 4.8.1 LACONIA : At Taenarum begins the territory of Laconia , inhabited by a free nation , and situate on a gulf 106 miles in circuit , and 38 across .
64 The towns are , Taenarum , Amyclae , Pherae , and Leuctra ; and , in the interior , Sparta , Theramne , and the spots where Cardamyle , Pitane , and Anthea formerly stood ; the former site of Thyrea , and Gerenia .
65 Here is also Mount Taygetus , the river Eurotas , the Gulf of Egilodes , the town of Psamathus , the Gulf of Gytheum , so called from the town of that name , from which place the passage is the safest across to the island of Crete .
66 All these places are bounded by the Promontory of Malea .
67 § 4.9.1 ARGOLIS : The next gulf , which extends as far as Scyllaion , is called the Argolic Gulf , being fifty miles across , and 162 in circuit .
68 The towns upon it are , Boea , Epidaurus surnamed Limera , Zarax , and the port of Cyphanta .
69 The rivers are the Inachus and the Erasinus , between which lies Argos , surnamed Hippium , situate beyond the place called Lerna , and at a distance of two miles from the sea .
70 Nine miles farther is Mycenae , and the place where , it is said , Tiryns stood ; the site , too , of Mantinea .
71 The mountains are , Artemius , Apesantus , Asterion , Parparus , and some others , eleven in number .
72 The fountains are those of Niobe , Amymone , and Psamathe .
73 § 4.9.2 From Scyllaion to the Isthmus of Corinth is a distance of 177 miles .
74 We find here the towns of Hermione , Troezen , Coryphasium , and Argos , sometimes called " Inachian ," sometimes " Dipsian " Argos .
75 Then comes the port of Schoenites , and the Saronic Gulf , which was formerly encircled with a grove of oaks , from which it derives its present name , oaks in ancient Greece having been so called .
76 Upon this gulf is the town of Epidaurus , famous for its temple of Aesculapius , the Promontory of Spiraion , the port of Anthedus , Bucephalus , and then Cenchreae , previously mentioned , on this side of the Isthmus , with its temple of Neptune , famous for the games celebrated there every five years .
77 So many are the gulfs which penetrate the shores of the Peloponnesus , so many the seas which howl around it .
78 Invaded by the Ionian on the north , it is beaten by the Sicilian on the west , buffeted by the Cretan on the south , by the Aegean on the S.E. , and by the Myrtoan on the N.E. ; which last sea begins at the Gulf of Megara , and washes all the coast of Attica .
79 § 4.10.1 ARCADIA : Its interior is occupied for the greater part by Arcadia , which , remote from the sea on every side , was originally called Drymodes , and at a later period Pelasgis .
80 The cities of Arcadia are , Psophis , Mantinea , Stymphalus , Tegea , Antigonea , Orchomenus , Pheneum , Palantium ( from which the Palatium at Rome derives its name ) , Megalopolis , Gortyna , Bucolium , Carnion , Parrhasia , Thelpusa , Melaenae , Heraea , Pylae , Pallene , Agrae , Epium , Cynaethae , Lepreon of Arcadia , Parthenium , Alea , Methydrium , Enispe , Macistum , Lampia , Clitorium , and Kleonai ; between which two last towns is the district of Nemea , commonly known as Bembinadia .
81 § 4.10.2 The mountains of Arcadia are , Pholoe , with a town of the same name , Cyllene , Lycaeus , upon which is the temple of Lycaean Jupiter ; Maenalus , Artemisius , Parthenius , Lampeus , and Nonacris , besides eight others of no note .
82 The rivers are the Ladon , which rises in the marshes of Pheneus , and the Erymanthus , which springs from a mountain of the same name , and flows into the Alpheus .
83 § 4.10.3 The other cities of Achaia worthy of mention are those of the Aliphiraei , the Abeatae , the Pyrgenses , the Paroreatae , the Paragenitae [ or Pharygenitae ] , the Tortuni , the Typanei , the Thriasii [ Thriusi ] and the Tritienses .
84 Domitius Nero [ the emperor ] granted liberty to the whole of Achaia .
85 The Peloponnesus , from the Promontory of Malea to the town of Aegium on the Corinthian Gulf , is 190 miles in length , and 125 miles across from Elis to Epidaurus ; the distance being , from Olympia to Argos , through Arcadia , sixty-eight miles .
86 The distance from Olympia to Phlious has been already mentioned .
87 Throughout the whole of this region , as though nature had been desirous to compensate for the inroads of the sea , seventy-six mountains raise their lofty heads .
88 § 4.11.1 ATTICA : At the narrow neck of the Isthmus , Hellas begins , by our people known as Graecia .
89 The first state that presents itself is Attica , anciently called Acte .
90 It touches the Isthmus in that part of it which is called Megaris , from the colony of Megara , lying on the opposite side to Pagae .
91 § 4.11.2 These two towns are situate at the spot where the Peloponnesus projects to the greatest distance ; being placed , one on each side , upon the very shoulders of Hellas as it were .
92 The Pagaeans , as well as the people of Aegosthena , belong to the jurisdiction of Megara .
93 On the coast there is the port of Schoenos , the towns of Sidus and Cremmyon , the Scironian Rocks , six miles in length , Geranea , Megara , and Eleusis .
94 Oinoe and Probalinthos also formerly existed here ; the ports of Piraeus and Phalerum are distant from the Isthmus fifty-five miles , being united to Athens , which lies in the interior , by a wall five miles in length .
95 Athens is a free city , and needs not a word more from us in its commendation ; of fame it enjoys even more than enough .
96 In Attica there are the Fountains of Cephisia , Larine , Callirrhoe Enneacrunos , and the mountains of Brilessus , Aegialeus , Icarius , Hymettus , Lycabettus , and the place where Ilissus stood .
97 At the distance of forty-five miles from the Piraeus is the Promontory of Sounion .
98 There is also the Promontory of Thoricos ; Potamos , Steria , and Brauron , once towns , the borough of Rhamnus , the place where Marathon stood , the Thriasian plain , the town of Melite , and Oropus upon the confines of Boeotia .
99 § 4.12.1 BOIOTIA : In this country are Anthedon , Onchestus , the free town of Thespiae , Lebadea , and then Thebes , surnamed Boeotian , which does not yield the palm to Athens even in celebrity ; the native land , according to the common notion , of the two Divinities Liber and Hercules .
100 The birth-place of the Muses too is pointed out in the grove of Helicon .
101 To this same Thebes also belong the forest of Cithaeron , and the river Ismenus .
102 Besides these , there are in Boeotia the Fountains of Oidipodia , Psamathe , Dirce , Epicrane , Arethusa , Hippocrene , Aganippe , and Gargaphie ; and , besides the mountains already mentioned , Mycalesos , Hadylius , and Acontius .
103 The remaining towns between Megara and Thebes are Eleutherae , Haliartus , Plataeae , Pherae , Aspledon , Hyle , Thisbe , Erythrae , Glissas , and Copae ; near the river Cephisus , Larymna and Anchoa ; as also Medeon , Phlygone , Acraephia , Coronea , and Chaeronea .
104 Again , on the coast and below Thebes , are Ocalea , Heleon , Scolos , Schoenos , Peteon , Hyriae , Mycalesos , Iresion , Pteleon , Olyros , and Tanagra , the people of which are free ; and , situate upon the very mouth of the Euripus , a strait formed by the opposite island of Euboea , Aulis , so famous for its capacious harbour .
105 The Boeotians formerly had the name of Hyantes .
106 § 4.12.2 After them come the Locrians , surnamed Epicnemidii , formerly called Leleges , through whose country the river Cephisus passes , in its course to the sea .
107 Their towns are Opus ; from which the Opuntian Gulf takes its name , and Cynos .
108 Daphnus is the only town of Phocis situate on the coast .
109 In the interior of Locris is Elatea , and on the banks of the Cephisus , as we have previously stated , Lilaea , and , facing Delphi , Cnemis and Hyampolis .
110 Again , upon the coast of the Locrians , are Larymna , and Thronium , near which last the river Boagrius enters the sea .
111 Also , the towns of Narycion , Alope , and Scarphia ; and then the gulf which receives the name of the Maliac from the people who dwell there , and upon which are the towns of Halcyone , Econia , and Phalara .
112 § 4.13.1 DORIS : Doris comes next , in which are Sperchios , Erineon , Boion , Pindus , and Cytinum .
113 Behind Doris lies Mount Oita .
114 § 4.14.1 PHTHIOTIS : Haemonia follows , a country which has often changed its name , having been successively called Pelasgic Argos , Hellas , Thessaly , and Dryopis , always taking its surname from its kings .
115 In this country was born the king whose name was Graecus ; and from whom Graecia was so called ; and here too was born Hellen , from whom the Hellenes derive their name .
116 The same people Homer has called by three different names , Myrmidones , Hellenes , and Achaei .
117 § 4.14.2 That portion of these people which inhabit the country adjacent to Doris are called Phthiotae .
118 Their towns are Echinus , at the mouth of the river Sperchius , and , at four miles from the narrow pass of Thermopylae , Heraclea , which from it takes its surname of Trachin .
119 Here too is Mount Callidromus , and the celebrated towns of Hellas , Halos , Lamia , Phthia , and Arne .
120 § 4.15.1 THESSALY PROPER : In Thessaly is Orchomenus , formerly called the Minyan , and the towns of Almon , by some called Salmon , Atrax , and Pelinna ; the Fountain of Hyperia ; the towns also of Pherae , at the back of which is Pieria , extending to Macedonia , Larisa , Gomphi , Thebes of Thessaly , the grove of Pteleon , the Gulf of Pagasa , the town of Pagasa , which was afterwards called Demetrias , the Plains of Pharsalia , with a free city of similar name , Crannon , and Iletia .
121 The mountains of Phthiotis are Nymphaeus , once so beautiful for its garden scenery , the work of nature ; Busygaeus , Donacesa , Bermius , Daphusa , Chimerion , Athamas , and Stephane .
122 In Thessaly there are thirty-four , of which the most famous are Cercetii , Olympus , Pierus , and Ossa , opposite to which last are Pindus and Othrys , the abodes of the Lapithae .
123 These mountains look towards the west , Pelion towards the east , all of them forming a curve like an amphitheatre , in the interior of which , lying before them , are no less than seventy-five cities .
124 The rivers of Thessaly are the Apidanus , the Phoenix , the Enipeus , the Onochonus , and the Pamisos .
125 There is also the Fountain of Messeis , and the lake Boebeis .
126 The river Peneus too , superior to all others in celebrity , takes its rise near Gomphi , and flows down a well-wooded valley between Ossa and Olympus , a distance of five hundred stadia , being navigable half that distance .
127 The vale , for a distance of five miles through which this river runs , is called by the name of Tempe ; being a jugerum and a half nearly in breadth , while on the right and left , the mountain chain slopes away with a gentle elevation , beyond the range of human vision , the foliage imparting its colour to the light within .
128 Along this vale glides the Peneus , reflecting the green tints as it rolls along its pebbly bed , its banks covered with tufts of verdant herbage , and enlivened by the melodious warblings of the birds .
129 The Peneus receives the river Orcus , or rather , I should say , does not receive it , but merely carries its waters , which swim on its surface like oil , as Homer says ; and then , after a short time , rejects them , refusing to allow the waters of a river devoted to penal sufferings and engendered for the Furies to mingle with his silvery streams .
130 § 4.16.1 MAGNESIA : To Thessaly Magnesia joins , in which is the fountain of Libethra , the towns Iolcos , Ormenium , Pyrrha , Methone , Olizon , the Promontory of Sepias , the towns Castana and Spalathra , the promontory Aeantium , the towns Meliboea , Rhizus , and Erymnae ( Eurymenai ) ; the mouth of the Peneus , the towns Homolium , Orthe , Iresiae , Pelinna ( Phalanna ) , Thaumacie , Gyrton , Crannon , Acharne , Dotion , Melite , Phylace , and Potniae .
131 The length of Epirus , Achaia , Attica , and Thessaly is said altogether to amount to 490 miles , the breadth to 297 .
132 § 4.17.1 MACEDONIA : Macedonia comes next , including 150 nations , and renowned for its two kings and its former empire over the world ; it was formerly known by the name of Emathia .
133 Stretching away towards the nations of Epirus on the west it lies at the back of Magnesia and Thessaly , being itself exposed to the attacks of the Dardani .
134 Paeonia and Pelagonia protect its northern parts from the Triballi .
135 Its towns are Aegiae , at which place its kings were usually buried , Beroea , and , in the country called Pieria from the grove of that name , Aiginium .
136 Upon the coast are Heraclea , the river Apilas , the towns of Pydna and Aloros , and the river Haliacmon .
137 In the interior are the Aloritae , the Vallaei , the Phylacaei , the Cyrrhestae , the Tyrissaei , the colony of Pella , and Stobi , a town with the rights of Roman citizens .
138 Next comes Antigonea , Europus upon the river Axius , and another place of the same name by which the Rhoemdias flows , Scydra , Eordaea , Mieza , and Gordyniae .
139 Then , upon the coast , Ichne , and the river Axius : along this frontier the Dardani , the Treres , and the Pieres , border on Macedonia .
140 Leaving this river , there are the nations of Paeonia , the Paroraei , the Eordenses , the Almopii , the Pelagones , and the Mygdones .
141 § 4.17.2 Next come the mountains of Rhodope , Scopius , and Orbelus ; and , lying along the extent of country in front of these mountains , the Arethusii , the Antiochienses , the Idomenenses , the Doberi , the Aestraeenses , the Allantenses , the Audaristenses , the Morylli , the Garesci , the Lyncestae , the Othryonei , and the Amantini and Orestae , both of them free peoples ; the colonies of Bullis and Dium , the Xylopolitae , the Scotussaei , a free people , Heraclea Sintica , the Tymphaei , and the Toronaei .
142 § 4.17.3 Upon the coast of the Macedonian Gulf there are the town of Chalastra , and , more inland , Piloros ; also Lete , and at the extreme bend of the Gulf , Thessalonica , a free city ; ( from this place to Dyrrhachium it is 245 miles ,) and then Thermae .
143 Upon the Gulf of Thermae are the towns of Dicaea , Pydna , Derra , Scione , the Promontory of Canastraion , and the towns of Pallene and Phlegra .
144 In this region also are the mountains Hypsizorus , Epitus , Halcyone , and Elaeuomne ; the towns of Nyssos , Phryxelon , Mendae , and what was formerly Potidaea on the isthmus of Pallene , but now the colony of Cassandria ; Anthemus , Olophyxus , and the Gulf of Mecyberna ; the towns of Miscella , Ampelos , Torone , Singos , and the canal , a mile and a half in length , by means of which Xerxes , king of the Persians , cut off Mount Athos from the main land .
145 This mountain projects from the level plain of the adjacent country into the sea , a distance of seventy-five miles ; its circumference at its base being 150 miles in extent .
146 There was formerly upon its summit the town of Acroathon : the present towns are Uranopolis , Palaeorium , Thyssus , Kleonai , and Apollonia , the inhabitants of which have the surname of Macrobii .
147 The town also of Cassera , and then the other side of the Isthmus , after which come Acanthus , Stagira , Sithone , Heraclea , and the country of Mygdonia that lies below , in which are situate , at some distance from the sea , Apollonia and Arethusa .
148 Again , upon the coast we have Posidium , and the bay with the town of Cermorus , Amphipolis , a free town , and the nation of the Bisaltae .
149 We then come to the river Strymon which takes its rise in Mount Haemus and forms the boundary of Macedonia : it is worthy of remark that it first discharges itself into seven lakes before it proceeds onward in its course .
150 § 4.17.4 Such is Macedonia , which was once the mistress of the world , which once extended her career over Asia , Armenia , Iberia , Albania , Cappadocia , Syria , Egypt , Taurus , and Caucasus , which reduced the whole of the East under her power , and triumphed over the Bactri , the Medes , and the Persians .
151 She too it was who proved the conqueror of India , thus treading in the footsteps of Father Liber and of Hercules ; and this is that same Macedonia , of which our own general Paulus Aemilius sold to pillage seventy-two cities in one day .
152 So great the difference in her lot resulting from the actions of two individuals !
153 § 4.18.1 THRACE ; THE AEGEAN SEA .
154 Thrace now follows , divided into fifty strategies , and to be reckoned among the most powerful nations of Europe .
155 Among its peoples whom we ought not to omit to name are the Denseletae and the Medi , dwelling upon the right bank of the Strymon , and joining up to the Bisaltae above mentioned ; on the left there are the Digerri and a number of tribes of the Bessi , with various names , as far as the river Mestus , which winds around the foot of Mount Pangaion , passing among the Elethi , the Diobessi , the Carbilesi ; and then the Brysae , the Sapaei , and the Odomanti .
156 The territory of the Odrysae gives birth to the Hebrus , its banks being inhabited by the Cabyleti , the Pyrogeri , the Drugeri , the Caenici , the Hypsalti , the Beni , the Corpili , the Bottiaei , and the Edoni .
157 In the same district are also the Selletae , the Priantae , the Doloncae , the Thyni , and the Greater Coeletae , below Mount Haemus , the Lesser at the foot of Rhodope .
158 Between these tribes runs the river Hebrus .
159 We then come to a town at the foot of Rhodope , first called Poneropolis , afterwards Philippopolis from the name of its founder , and now , from the peculiarity of its situation , Trimontium .
160 To reach the summit of Haemus you have to travel six miles .
161 The sides of it that look in the opposite direction and slope towards the Ister are inhabited by the Moesi , the Getae , the Aorsi , the Gaudae , and the Clariae ; below them , are the Arraei Sarmatae , also called Arreatae , the Scythians , and , about the shores of the Euxine , the Moriseni and the Sithonii , the forefathers of the poet Orpheus , dwell .
162 § 4.18.2 Thus is Thrace bounded by the Ister on the north , by the Euxine , and the Propontis on the east , and by the Aegean Sea on the south ; on the coast of which , after leaving the Strymon , we come in turn to Apollonia , Oisyma , Neapolis and Datos .
163 In the interior is the colony of Philippi , distant from Dyrrhachium 325 miles ; also Scotussa , the city of Topiris , the mouth of the river Mestus , Mount Pangaeus , Heraclea , Olynthos , Abdera , a free city , the people of the Bistones and their Lake .
164 Here was formerly the city of Tirida , which struck such terror with its stables of the horses of Diomedes .
165 At the present day we find here Dicaea , Ismaron , the place where Parthenion stood , Phalesina , and Maronea , formerly called Orthagorea .
166 We then come to Mount Serrium and Zone , and then the place called Doriscus , capable of containing ten thousand men , for it was in bodies of ten thousand that Xerxes here numbered his army .
167 We then come to the mouth of the Hebrus , the Port of Stentor , and the free town of Aenos , with the tomb there of Polydorus , the region formerly of the Cicones .
168 § 4.18.3 From Doriscus there is a winding coast as far as Macron Tichos , or the " Long Wall ," a distance of 122 miles ; round Doriscus flows the river Melas , from which the Gulf of Melas receives its name .
169 The towns are , Cypsela , Bisanthe , and Macron Tichos , already mentioned , so called because a wall extends from that spot between the two seas , — that is to say , from the Propontis to the Gulf of Melas , thus excluding the Chersonesus , which projects beyond it .
170 § 4.18.4 The other side of Thrace now begins , on the coast of the Euxine , where the river Ister discharges itself ; and it is in this quarter perhaps that Thrace possesses the finest cities , Histropolis , namely , founded by the Milesians , Tomi , and Callatis , formerly called Acervetis .
171 It also had the cities of Heraclea and Bizone , which latter was swallowed up by an earthquake ; it now has Dionysopolis , formerly called Cruni , which is washed by the river Zyras .
172 All this country was formerly possessed by the Scythians , surnamed Aroteres ; their towns were , Aphrodisias , Libistos , Zygere , Rocobe , Eumenia , Parthenopolis , and Gerania , where a nation of Pigmies is said to have dwelt ; the barbarians used to call them Cattuzi , and entertain a belief that they were put to flight by cranes .
173 Upon the coast , proceeding from Dionysopolis , is Odessus , a city of the Milesians , the river Panysus , and the town of Tetranaulochus .
174 Mount Haemus , which , with its vast chain , overhangs the Euxine , had in former times upon its summit the town of Aristaion .
175 At the present day there are upon the coast Mesembria , and Anchialum , where Messa formerly stood .
176 The region of Astice formerly had a town called Anthium ; at the present day Apollonia occupies its site .
177 The rivers here are the Panisos , the Riras , the Tearus , and the Orosines ; there are also the towns of Thynias , Halmydessos , Develton , with its lake , now known as Deultum , a colony of veterans , and Phinopolis , near which last is the Bosporus .
178 From the mouth of the Ister to the entrance of the Euxine , some writers have made to be a distance of 555 miles ; Agrippa , however , increases the length by sixty miles .
179 The distance thence to Macron Tichos , or the Long Wall , previously mentioned , is 150 miles ; and , from it to the extremity of the Chersonesus , 125 .
180 § 4.18.5 On leaving the Bosporus we come to the Gulf of Casthenes , and two harbours , the one called the Old Men 's Haven , and the other the Women 's Haven .
181 Next comes the promontory of Chrysoceras , upon which is the town of Byzantium , a free state , formerly called Lygos , distant from Dyrrhachium 711 miles , — so great being the space of land that intervenes between the Adriatic Sea and the Propontis .
182 We next come to the rivers Bathynias and Pydaras , or Athyras , and the towns of Selymbria and Perinthus , which join the mainland by a neck only 200 feet in width .
183 In the interior are Bizya , a citadel of the kings of Thrace , and hated by the swallows , in consequence of the sacrilegious crime of Tereus ; the district called Caenica , and the colony of Flaviopolis , where formerly stood a town called Caela .
184 Then , at a distance of fifty miles from Bizya , we come to the colony of Apros , distant from Philippi 180 miles .
185 Upon the coast is the river Erginus ; here formerly stood the town of Ganos ; and Lysimachia in the Chersonesus is being now gradually deserted .
186 § 4.18.6 At this spot there is another isthmus , similar in name to the other , and of about equal width ; and , in a manner by no means dissimilar , two cities formerly stood on the shore , one on either side , Pactye on the side of the Propontis , and Cardia on that of the Gulf of Melas , the latter deriving its name from the shape which the land assumes .
187 These , however , were afterwards united with Lysimachia , which stands at a distance of five miles from Macron Tichos .
188 The Chersonesus formerly had , on the side of the Propontis , the towns of Tiristasis , Crithotes , and Cissa , on the banks of the river Aegos ; it now has , at a distance of twenty-two miles from the colony of Apros , Resistos , which stands opposite to the colony of Parium .
189 The Hellespont also , which separates , as we have already stated , Europe from Asia , by a channel seven stadia in width , has four cities facing each other , Callipolis and Sestos in Europe , and Lampsacus and Abydos in Asia .
190 On the Chersonesus , there is the promontory of Mastusia , lying opposite to Sigeum ; upon one side of it stands the Cynossema ( for so the tomb of Hecuba is called ) , the naval station of the Achaeans , and a tower ; and near it the shrine of Protesilaus .
191 On the extreme front of the Chersonesus , which is called Aeolium , there is the city of Elaeus .
192 Advancing thence towards the Gulf of Melas , we have the port of Coelos , Panormus , and then Cardia , previously mentioned .
193 § 4.18.7 In this manner is the third great Gulf of Europe bounded .
194 The mountains of Thrace , besides those already mentioned , are Edonus , Gigemoros , Meritus , and Melamphyllos ; the rivers are the Bargus and the Syrmus , which fall into the Hebrus .
195 The length of Macedonia , Thrace , and the Hellespont has been already mentioned ; some writers , however , make it 720 miles , the breadth being 384 .
196 § 4.18.8 What may be called a rock rather than an island , lying between Tenos and Chios , has given its name to the Aegean Sea ; it has the name of Aex from its strong resemblance to a goat , which is so called in Greek , and shoots precipitately from out of the middle of the sea .
197 Those who are sailing towards the isle of Andros from Achaia , see this rock on the left , boding no good , and warning them of its dangers .
198 Part of the Aegean Sea bears the name of Myrtoan , being so called from the small island [ of Myrtos ] which is seen as you sail towards Macedonia from Geraistos , not far from Carystus in Euboea .
199 The Romans include all these seas under two names , — the Macedonian , in those parts where it touches the coasts of Macedonia or Thrace , and the Grecian where it washes the shores of Greece The Greeks , however , divide the Ionian Sea into the Sicilian and the Cretan Seas , after the name of those islands ; and they give the name of Icarian to that part which lies between Samos and Myconos .
200 The gulfs which we have already mentioned , have given to these seas the rest of their names .
201 Such , then , are the seas and the various nations which are comprehended in the third great Gulf of Europe .
202 § 4.19.1 THE ISLANDS WHICH LIE BEFORE THE LANDS ALREADY MENTIONED .
203 Lying opposite to Thesprotia , at a distance of twelve miles from Buthrotus , and of fifty from Acroceraunia , is the island of Corcyra , with a city of the same name , the citizens of which are free ; also a town called Cassiope , and a temple dedicated to Jupiter Cassius .
204 This island is ninety-seven miles in length , and in Homer has the names of Scheria and Phaeacia ; while Callimachus calls it Drepane .
205 There are some other islands around it , such as Thoronos , lying in the direction of Italy , and the two islands of Paxos in that of Leucadia , both of them five miles distant from Corcyra .
206 Not far from these , and in front of Corcyra , are Ericusa , Marathe , Elaphusa , Malthace , Trachie , Pythionia , Ptychia , Tarachie , and , off Phalacrum , a promontory of Corcyra , the rock into which ( according to the story , which arises no doubt from the similarity of appearance ) the ship of Ulysses was changed .
207 § 4.19.2 Before Leucimna we find the islands of Sybota , and between Leucadia and Achaia a great number of islands , among which are those called Teleboides , as also Taphiae ; by the natives , those which lie before Leucadia are called by the names of Taphias , Oxiae , and Prinoessa ; while those that are in front of Aitolia are the Echinades , consisting of Aegialia , Cotonis , Thyatira , Geoaris , Dionysia , Cyrnus , Chalcis , Pinara , and Mystus .
208 § 4.19.3 In front of these , and lying out at sea , are Cephallenia and Zacynthus , both of them free , Ithaca , Dulichium , Same , and Crocyle .
209 Cephallenia , formerly known as Melaena , lies at a distance of eleven miles from Paxos , and is ninety-three miles in circumference : its city of Same has been levelled to the ground by the Romans ; but it still possesses three others .
210 Between this island and Achaia lies the island of Zacynthus , remarkable for its city of the same name , and for its singular fertility .
211 It formerly had the name of Hyrie , and lies to the south of Cephallenia , at a distance of twenty-five miles ; in it there is the famous mountain of Elatus .
212 This island is thirty-six miles in circumference .
213 At a distance of fifteen miles from Zacynthus is Ithaca , in which is Mount Neritus ; its circumference in all is twenty-five miles .
214 Twelve miles distant from this island is Araxus , a promontory of the Peloponnesus .
215 Before Ithaca , lying out in the main sea , are Asteris and Prote ; and before Zacynthus , at a distance of thirty-five miles in the direction of the south-east wind , are the two Strophades , by some known as the Plotae .
216 Before Cephallenia lies Letoia , before Pylos the three Sphagiae , and before Messene the Oinussae , as many in number .
217 § 4.19.4 In the Asinaean Gulf there are the three Thyrides , and in that of Laconia Theganusa , Cothon , and Cythera , with the town of that name , the former name of which island was Porphyris .
218 It is situate five miles from the promontory of Malea , thus forming a strait very dangerous to navigation .
219 In the Gulf of Argolis are Pityusa , Irine , and Ephyre ; opposite the territory of Hermione , Tiparenus , Aperopia , Colonis , and Aristera ; and , opposite that of Troezen , Calauria , at a distance of half a mile , Plateis , Belbina , Lasia , and Baucidias .
220 Opposite Epidaurus is Cecryphalos , and Pityonesos , six miles distant from the mainland ; and , at a distance of fifteen miles from this last , Aigina , a free island , the length of which , as you sail past it , is eighteen miles .
221 This island is twenty miles distant from Piraeus , the port of Athens : it used formerly to be called Oinone .
222 Opposite the promontory of Spiraion , lie Eleusa , Adendros , the two islands called Craugiae , the two Caeciae , Selachusa Cenchreis , and Aspis ; as also , in the Gulf of Megara , the four Methurides .
223 Aegila lies at a distance of fifteen miles from Cythera , and of twenty-five from Phalasarna , a city of Crete .
224 § 4.20.1 CRETE : Crete itself lies from east to west , the one side facing the south , the other the north , and is known to fame by the renown of its hundred cities .
225 Dosiades says , that it took its name from the nymph Crete , the daughter of Hesperides ; Anaximander , from a king of the Curetes , Philistides of Mallus ; while Crates says that it was at first called Aeria , and after that Curetis ; and some have been of opinion that it had the name of Macaron from the serenity of its climate .
226 In breadth it nowhere exceeds fifty miles , being widest about the middle .
227 In length , however , it is full 270 miles , and 589 in circumference , forming a bend towards the Cretan Sea , which takes its name from it .
228 At its eastern extremity is the Promontory of Sammonium , facing Rhodes , while towards the west it throws out that of Criumetopon , in the direction of Cyrene .
229 § 4.20.2 The more remarkable cities of Crete are , Phalasarna , Etaea , Cisamon , Pergamum , Cydonia , Minoium , Apteron , Pantomatrium , Amphimalla , Rhithymna , Panormus , Cytaion , Apollonia , Matium , Heraclea , Miletos , Ampelos , Hierapytna , Lebena , and Hierapolis ; and , in the interior , Gortyna , Phaestum , Cnossus , Polyrrenium , Myrina , Lycastus , Rhamnus , Lyctus , Dium , Asus , Pyloros , Rhytion , Elatos , Pharae , Holopyxos , Lasos , Eleuthernae , Therapnae , Marathusa , and Tylisos ; besides some sixty others , of which the memory only exists .
230 The mountains are those of Cadistus , Ida , Dictynnaeus , and Corycus .
231 This island is distant , at its promontory of Criumetopon , according to Agrippa , from Phycus , the promontory of Cyrene , 125 miles ; and at Cadistus , from Malea in the Peloponnesus , eighty .
232 From the island of Carpathus , at its promontory of Sammonium it lies in a westerly direction , at a distance of sixty miles ; this last-named island is situate between it and Rhodes .
233 § 4.20.3 The other islands in its vicinity , and lying in front of the Peloponnesus , are the two isles known as Corycae , and the two called Mylae .
234 On the north side , having Crete on the right , and opposite to Cydonia , is Leuce , and the two islands known as Budroae .
235 Opposite to Matium lies Dia ; opposite to the promontory of Itanum , Onisia and Leuce ; and over against Hierapytna , Chrysa and Gaudos .
236 In the same neighbourhood , also , are Ophiussa , Butoa , and Aradus ; and , after doubling Criumetopon , we come to the three islands known as Musagorus .
237 Before the promontory of Sammonium lie the islands of Phocoe , the Platiae , the Sirnides , Naulochos , Armedon , and Zephyre .
238 § 4.20.4 Belonging to Hellas , but still in the Aegean Sea , we have the Lichades , consisting of Scarphia , Coresa , Phocaria , and many others which face Attica , but have no towns upon them , and are consequently of little note .
239 Opposite Eleusis , however , is the far-famed Salamis ; before it , Psyttalia ; and , at a distance of five miles from Sounion , the island of Helene .
240 At the same distance from this last is Ceos , which some of our countrymen have called Cea , and the Greeks Hydrussa , an island which has been torn away from Euboea .
241 It was formerly 500 stadia in length ; but more recently four-fifths of it , in the direction of Boeotia , have been swallowed up by the sea .
242 The only towns it now has left are Iulis and Carthaea ; Coresus and Poeeessa have perished .
243 Varro informs us , that from this place there used to come a cloth of very fine texture , used for women 's dresses .
244 § 4.21.1 EUBOIA : Euboea itself has also been rent away from Boeotia ; the channel of the Euripus , which flows between them , being so narrow as to admit of the opposite shores being united by a bridge .
245 At the south , this island is remarkable for its two promontories , that of Geraistos , which looks towards Attica , and that of Caphareus , which faces the Hellespont ; on the north it has that of Kenaion .
246 In no part does this island extend to a greater breadth than forty miles , while it never contracts to less than two .
247 In length it runs along the whole coast of Boeotia , extending from Attica as far as Thessaly , a distance of 150 miles .
248 In circumference it measures 365 , and is distant from the Hellespont , on the side of Caphareus , 225 miles .
249 The cities for which it was formerly famous were , Pyrrha , Porthmos , Nesos , Cerinthos , Oreus , Dium , Aedepsus , Ocha , and Oichalia ; at present it is ennobled by those of Chalcis ( opposite which , on the mainland , is Aulis ) , Geraistos , Eretria , Carystus , Oritanum , and Artemisium .
250 Here are also the Fountain of Arethusa , the river Lelantos , and the warm springs known as Ellopiae ; it is still better known , however , for the marble of Carystus .
251 This island used formerly to be called Chalcodontis and Macris , as we learn from Dionysius and Ephorus ; according to Aristides , Macra ; also , as Callidemus says , Chalcis , because copper was first discovered here .
252 Menaechmus says that it was called Abantias , and the poets generally give it the name of Asopis .
253 § 4.22.1 THE CYCLADES : Beyond Euboea , and out in the Myrtoan Sea , are numerous other islands ; but those more especially famous are , Glauconnesos and the Aegila .
254 Off the promontory , too , of Geraistos are the Cyclades , lying in a circle around Delos , from which circumstance they derive their name .
255 The first of them is the one called Andros with a city of the same name , distant from Geraistos ten miles , and from Ceos thirty-nine .
256 Myrsilus tells us that this island was at first called Cauros , and after that Antandros ; Callimachus calls it Lasia , and others again Nonagria , Hydrussa , and Epagris .
257 It is ninety-three miles in circumference .
258 At a distance of one mile from Andros and of fifteen from Delos , is Tenos , with a city of the same name ; this island is fifteen miles in length .
259 Aristotle says that it was formerly called Hydrussa , from the abundance of water found here , while some writers call it Ophiussa .
260 The other islands are , Myconos , with the mountain of Dimastus , distant from Delos fifteen miles ; Siphnos , formerly called Meropia and Acis , twenty-eight miles in circumference ; Seriphos , twelve miles in circuit ; Prepesinthus ; Cythnos ; and then , by far the most famous among the Cyclades , and lying in the very middle of them , Delos itself ; so famous for its temple of Apollo , and its extensive commerce .
261 This island long floated on the waves , and , as tradition says , was the only one that had never experienced an earthquake , down to the time of M .
262 Varro ; Mucianus however has informed us , that it has been twice so visited .
263 Aristotle states that this island received its name from the fact of its having so suddenly made its appearance on emerging from the sea ; Aglaosthenes , however , gives it the name of Cynthia , and others of Ortygia , Asteria , Lagia , Chlamydia , Cynthus , and , from the circumstance of fire having been first discovered here , Pyrpile .
264 Its circumference is five miles only ; Mount Cynthus here raises his head .
265 § 4.22.2 Next to this island is Rhene , which Anticlides calls by the name of Celadussa , and Callidemus , Artemite ; Scyros , which the old writers have stated to be twenty miles in circumference , but Mucianus 160 ; Oliaros ; and Paros , with a city of the same name , distant from Delos thirty-eight miles , and famous for its marble ; it was first called Platea , and after that , Minois .
266 At a distance of seven miles from this last island is Naxos , with a town of the same name ; it is eighteen miles distant from Delos .
267 Naxos was formerly called Strongyle , then Dia , and then Dionysias , in consequence of the fruitfulness of its vineyards ; others again have called it the Lesser Sicily , or Callipolis .
268 It is seventy-five miles in circumference — half as large again as Paros .
269 § 4.23.1 THE SPORADES : The islands thus far are considered as belonging to the Cyclades ; the rest that follow are the Sporades .
270 These are , Helene , Phacussa , Nicasia , Schinussa , Pholegandros , and , at a distance of thirty-eight miles from Naxos , Icaros , which has given its name to the surrounding sea , and is the same number of miles in length , with two cities , and a third now no longer in existence : this island used formerly to be called Doliche , Macris , and Ichthyoessa .
271 It is situate fifty miles to the north-east of Delos , and thirty-five from the island of Samos .
272 Between Euboea and Andros , there is an arm of the sea ten miles in width , and from Icaros to Geraistos is a distance of 112 1 / 2 miles .
273 § 4.23.2 After we pass these , no regular order can be well observed ; the rest must therefore be mentioned indiscriminately .
274 There is the island of Scyros , and that of Ios , eighteen miles distant from Naxos , and deserving of all veneration for the tomb there of Homer ; it is twenty-five miles in length , and was formerly known by the name of Phoenice ; also Odia , Oletandros , and Gyara , with a city of the same name , the island being twelve miles in circumference , and distant from Andros sixty-two .
275 At a distance of eighty miles from Gyara is Syrnos , then Cynaethus , Telos , noted for its unguents , and by Callimachus called Agathussa , Donusa , Patmos , thirty miles in circumference , the Corassiae , Lebinthus , Leros , Cinara ; Sicinus , formerly called Oinoe ; Hieracia , also called Onus ; Casos , likewise called Astrabe ; Cimolus , or Echinussa ; and Melos , with a city of that name , which island Aristides calls Memblis , Aristotle Zephyria , Callimachus Mimallis , and Heraclides called Siphis and Acyta .
276 This last is the most circular in form of all these islands .
277 [ Buporthmus ] , Machia , then Hypere , formerly Patage , or , as others have it , Platage , but now called Amorgos , Polyaegos , Sapyle , and Thera , known as Calliste when it first sprang from the waves .
278 From this , at a later period , the island of Therasia was torn away , and between the two afterwards arose Automate , also called Hiera , and Thia , which in our own times came into existence in the vicinity of these islands .
279 Ios is distant from Thera twenty-five miles .
280 § 4.23.3 Next to these follow Lea , Ascania , Anaphe , Hippuris , and Astypalaea , a free state .
281 This island is eighty-eight miles in circumference , and 125 miles distant from Cadistus , in Crete .
282 From Astypalaea , Platea is distant sixty miles , and Caminia thirty-eight from this last .
283 We then come to the islands of Azibintha , Lamse , Tragaea , Pharmacussa , Thetaedia , Chalcia , Calymna , in which is a town , Coos , Eulimna , at a distance of twenty-five miles from which is Carpathus , which has given its name to the Carpathian Sea .
284 The distance thence to Rhodes , in the direction of the south-west wind , is fifty miles .
285 From Carpathus to Casus is seven miles , and from Casus to Sammonium , the promontory of Crete , thirty .
286 In the Euripus of Euboea , almost at the very mouth of it , are the four islands called Petaliae ; and , at its outlet , Atalante .
287 The Cyclades and the Sporades are bounded on the east by the Asiatic shores of the Icarian Sea , on the west by the Attic shores of the Myrtoan Sea , on the north by the Aegean , and on the south by the Cretan and Carpathian seas , extending 700 miles in length , and 200 in breadth .
288 § 4.23.4 The Gulf of Pagasa has in front of it Euthia , Cicynethus , Scyros , previously mentioned , and the very furthermost of the Cyclades and Sporades , Gerontia and Scandila ; the Gulf of Thermae , Iraesia , Solimnia , Eudemia , and Nea , which last is sacred to Minerva .
289 Athos has before it four islands ; Peparethus , formerly called Evoenus , with a city of that name , at a distance from Athos of nine miles ; Sciathus , at a distance of fifteen , and Imbros , with a city of the same name , at a distance of eighty-eight , miles .
290 This last island is distant from Mastusia , in the Chersonesus , twenty-five miles ; it is sixty-two miles in circumference , and is washed by the river Ilisus .
291 At a distance of twenty-two miles from it is Lemnos , being distant from Mount Athos eighty-seven ; it is 112 miles in circumference , and has the cities of Hephaestia and Myrina ; into the market-place of which last city Athos throws its shadow at the summer solstice .
292 The island of Thasos , constituting a free state , is six miles distant from Lemnos ; it formerly had the name of Aeria , or Aethria .
293 Abdera , on the mainland , is distant from Thasos twenty-two miles , Athos sixty-two .
294 The island of Samothrace , a free state , facing the river Hebrus , is the same distance from Thasos , being also thirty-two miles from Imbros , twenty-two from Lemnos , and thirty-eight from the coast of Thrace ; it is thirty-two miles in circumference , and in it rises Mount Saoce , ten miles in height .
295 This island is the most inaccessible of them all .
296 Callimachus mentions it by its ancient name of Dardania .
297 § 4.23.5 Between the Chersonesus and Samothrace , at a distance of about fifteen miles from them both , is the island of Halonnesos , and beyond it Gethone , Lamponia , and Alopeconnesus , not far from Coelos , a port of the Chersonesus , besides some others of no importance .
298 The following names may be also mentioned , as those of uninhabited islands in this gulf , of which we have been enabled to discover the names : — Desticos , Sarnos , Cyssiros , Charbrusa , Calathusa , Scylla , Draconon , Arconnesus , Diethusa , Scapos , Capheris , Mesate , Aeantion , Pateronnesos , Pateria , Calate , Neriphus , and Polendos .
299 § 4.24.1 THE HELLESPONT .
300 — THE LAKE MAEOTIS .
301 The fourth great Gulf of Europe begins at the Hellespont and ends at the entrance of the Maeotis .
302 But in order that the several portions of the Euxine and its coasts may be the better known , we must briefly embrace the form of it in one general view .
303 This vast sea , lying in front of Asia , is shut out from Europe by the projection of the shores of the Chersonesus , and effects an entrance into those countries by a narrow channel only , of the width , as already mentioned , of seven stadia , thus separating Europe from Asia .
304 The entrance of these Straits is called the Hellespont ; over it Xerxes , the king of the Persians , constructed a bridge of boats , across which he led his army .
305 A narrow channel extends thence a distance of eighty-six miles , as far as Priapus , a city of Asia , at which Alexander the Great passed over .
306 At this point the sea becomes wider , and after some distance again takes the form of a narrow strait .
307 The wider part is known as the Propontis , the Straits as the Thracian Bosporus , being only half-amile in width , at the place where Darius , the father of Xerxes , led his troops across by a bridge .
308 The extremity of this is distant from the Hellespont 239 miles .
309 § 4.24.2 We then come to the vast sea called the Euxine , which invades the land as it retreats afar , and the name of which was formerly Axenus .
310 As the shores bend inwards , this sea with a vast sweep stretches far away , curving on both sides after the manner of a pair of horns , so much so that in shape it bears a distinct resemblance to a Scythian bow .
311 In the middle of the curve it is joined by the mouth of Lake Maeotis , which is called the Cimmerian Bosporus , and is two miles and a half in width .
312 Between the two Bospori , the Thracian and the Cimmerian , there is a distance in a straight line , of 500 miles , as Polybius informs us .
313 We learn from Varro and most of the ancient writers , that the circumference of the Euxine is altogether 2150 miles ; but to this number Cornelius Nepos adds 350 more ; while Artemidorus makes it 2919 miles , Agrippa 2360 , and Mucianus 2425 .
314 In a similar manner some writers have fixed the length of the European shores of this sea at 1478 miles , others again at 1172 .
315 M. Varro gives the measurement as follows : — from the mouth of the Euxine to Apollonia 187 miles , and to Callatis the same distance ; thence to the mouth of the Ister 125 miles ; to the Borysthenes 250 ; to Chersonesus , a town of the Heracleotae , 325 ; to Panticapaion , by some called Bosporus , at the very extremity of the shores of Europe , 212 miles : the whole of which added together , makes 1337 miles .
316 Agrippa makes the distance from Byzantium to the river Ister 560 miles , and from thence to Panticapaion , 635 .
317 § 4.24.3 Lake Maeotis , which receives the river Tanais as it flows from the Riphaean Mountains , and forms the extreme boundary between Europe and Asia , is said to be 1406 miles in circumference ; which however some writers state at only 1125 .
318 From the entrance of this lake to the mouth of the Tanais in a straight line is , it is generally agreed , a distance of 375 miles .
319 § 4.24.4 The inhabitants of the coasts of this fourth great Gulf of Europe , as far as Istropolis , have been already mentioned in our account of Thrace .
320 Passing beyond that spot we come to the mouths of the Ister .
321 This river rises in Germany in the heights of Mount Abnoba , opposite to Rauricum , a town of Gaul , and flows for a course of many miles beyond the Alps and through nations innumerable , under the name of the Danube .
322 Adding immensely to the volume of its waters , at the spot where it first enters Illyricum , it assumes the name of Ister , and , after receiving sixty rivers , nearly one half of which are navigable , rolls into the Euxine by six vast channels .
323 The first of these is the mouth of Peuce , close to which is the island of Peuce itself , from which the neighbouring channel takes its name ; this mouth is swallowed up in a great swamp nineteen miles in length .
324 From the same channel too , above Istropolis , a lake takes its rise , sixty-three miles in circuit ; its name is Halmyris .
325 The second mouth is called Naracu-Stoma ; the third , which is near the island of Sarmatica , is called Calon-Stoma ; the fourth is known as Pseudo-Stomon , with its island called Conopon-Diabasis ; after which come the Boreon Stoma and the Psilon-Stoma .
326 These mouths are each of them so considerable , that for a distance of forty miles , it is said , the saltness of the sea is quite overpowered , and the water found to be fresh .
327 § 4.25.1 DACIA , SARMATIA : On setting out from this spot , all the nations met with are Scythian in general , though various races have occupied the adjacent shores ; at one spot the Getae , by the Romans called Daci ; at another the Sarmatae , by the Greeks called Sauromatae , and the Hamaxobii or Aorsi , a branch of them ; then again the base-born Scythians and descendants of slaves , or else the Troglodytae ; and then , after them , the Alani and the Rhoxalani .
328 The higher parts again , between the Danube and the Hercynian Forest , as far as the winter quarters of Pannonia at Carnuntum , and the borders of the Germans , are occupied by the Sarmatian lazyges , who inhabit the level country and the plains , while the Daci , whom they have driven as far as the river Pathissus , inhabit the mountain and forest ranges .
329 On leaving the river Marus , whether it is that or the Duria , that separates them from the Suevi and the kingdom of Vannius , the Basternae , and , after them , other tribes of the Germans occupy the opposite sides .
330 Agrippa considers the whole of this region , from the Ister to the ocean , to be 2100 miles in length , and 4400 miles in breadth to the river Vistula in the deserts of Sarmatia .
331 The name " Scythian " has extended , in every direction , even to the Sarmatae and the Germans ; but this ancient appellation is now only given to those who dwell beyond those nations , and live unknown to nearly all the rest of the world .
332 § 4.26.1 SCYTHIA : Leaving the Ister , we come to the towns of Cremniscos , Aepolium , the mountains of Macrocremnus , and the famous river Tyra , which gives name to a town on the spot where Ophiusa is said formerly to have stood .
333 The Tyragetae inhabit a large island situate in this river , which is distant from Pseudostomos , a mouth of the Ister , so called , 130 miles .
334 We then come to the Axiacae , who take their name from the river Axiaces , and beyond them , the Crobyzi , the river Rhodes , the Sagarian Gulf , and the port of Ordesos .
335 At a distance of 120 miles from the Tyra is the river Borysthenes , with a lake and a people of similar name , as also a town in the interior , at a distance of fifteen miles from the sea , the ancient names of which were Olbiopolis and Miletopolis .
336 Again , on the shore is the port of the Achaei , and the island of Achilles , famous for the tomb there of that hero , and , at a distance of 125 miles from it , a peninsula which stretches forth in the shape of a sword , in an oblique direction , and is called , from having been his place of exercise , Achilleos Dromos : the length of this , according to Agrippa , is eighty miles .
337 The Taurian Scythians and the Siraci occupy all this tract of country .
338 § 4.26.2 At this spot begins a well-wooded district , which has given to the sea that washes its banks the name of the Hylaean Sea ; its inhabitants are called Enoechadlae .
339 Beyond them is the river Panticapes , which separates the Nomades and the Georgi , and after it the Acesinus .
340 Some authors say that the Panticapes flows into the Borysthenes below Olbia .
341 Others , who are more correct , say that it is the Hypanis : so great is the mistake made by those who have placed it in Asia .
342 § 4.26.3 The sea runs in here and forms a large gulf , until there is only an intervening space of five miles between it and the Lake Maeotis , its margin forming the sea-line of extensive tracts of land , and numerous nations ; it is known as the Gulf of Carcinites .
343 Here we find the river Pacyris , the towns of Navarum and Carcine , and behind it Lake Buges , which discharges itself by a channel into the sea .
344 This Buges is separated by a ridge of rocks from Coretus , a gulf in the Lake Maeotis ; it receives the rivers Buges , Gerrus , and Hypacaris , which approach it from regions that lie in various directions .
345 For the Gerrus separates the Basilidae from the Nomades , the Hypacaris flows through the Nomades and the Hylaei , by an artificial channel into Lake Buges , and by its natural one into the Gulf of Coretus : this region bears the name of Scythia Sindice .
346 § 4.26.4 At the river Carcinites , Scythia Taurica begins , which was once covered by the sea , where we now see level plains extended on every side : beyond this the land rises into mountains of great elevation .
347 The peoples here are thirty in number , of which twenty-three dwell in the interior , six of the cities being inhabited by the Orgocyni , the Characeni , the Lagyrani , the Tractari , the Arsilachitae , and the Caliordi .
348 The Scythotauri possess the range of mountains : on the west they are bounded by the Chersonesus , and on the east by the Scythian Satarchae .
349 On the shore , after we leave Carcinites , we find the following towns ; Taphrae , situated on the very isthmus of the peninsula , and then Heraclea Chersonesus , to which its freedom has been granted by the Romans .
350 This place was formerly called Megarice , being the most polished city throughout all these regions , in consequence of its strict preservation of Grecian manners and customs .
351 A wall , five miles in length , surrounds it .
352 Next to this comes the Promontory of Parthenium , the city of the Tauri , Placia , the port of the Symboli , and the Promontory of Criumetopon , opposite to Carambis , a promontory of Asia , which runs out in the middle of the Euxine , leaving an intervening space between them of 170 miles , which circumstance it is in especial that gives to this sea the form of a Scythian bow .
353 After leaving this headland we come to a great number of harbours and lakes of the Tauri .
354 The town of Theodosia is distant from Criumetopon 125 miles , and from Chersonesus 165 .
355 Beyond it there were , in former times , the towns of Cytae , Zephyrium , Acrae , Nymphaion , and Dia .
356 Panticapaion , a city of the Milesians , by far the strongest of them all , is still in existence ; it lies at the entrance of the Bosporus , and is distant from Theodosia eighty-seven miles and a half , and from the town of Cimmerium , which lies on the other side of the Strait , as we have previously stated , two miles and a half .
357 Such is the width here of the channel which separates Asia from Europe , and which too , from being generally quite frozen over , allows of a passage on foot .
358 The width of the Cimmerian Bosporus is twelve miles and a half : it contains the towns of Hermisium , Myrmecium , and , in the interior of it , the island of Alopece .
359 From the spot called Taphrae , at the extremity of the isthmus , to the mouth of the Bosporus , along the line of the Lake Maeotis , is a distance of 260 miles .
360 § 4.26.5 Leaving Taphrae , and going along the mainland , we find in the interior the Auchetae , in whose country the Hypanis has its rise , as also the Neuroe , in whose district the Borysthenes has its source , the Geloni , the Thyssagetae , the Budini , the Basilidae , and the Agathyrsi with their azure-coloured hair .
361 Above them are the Nomades , and then a nation of Anthropophagi or cannibals .
362 On leaving Lake Buges , above the Lake Maeotis we come to the Sauromatae and the Essedones .
363 Along the coast , as far as the river Tanais , are the Maeotae , from whom the lake derives its name , and the last of all , in the rear of them , the Arimaspi .
364 We then come to the Riphaean mountains , and the region known by the name of Pterophoros , because of the perpetual fall of snow there , the flakes of which resemble feathers ; a part of the world which has been condemned by the decree of nature to lie immersed in thick darkness ; suited for nothing but the generation of cold , and to be the asylum of the chilling blasts of the northern winds .
365 § 4.26.6 Behind these mountains , and beyond the region of the northern winds , there dwells , if we choose to believe it , a happy race , known as the Hyperborei , a race that lives to an extreme old age , and which has been the subject of many marvellous stories .
366 At this spot are supposed to be the hinges upon which the world revolves , and the extreme limits of the revolutions of the stars .
367 Here we find light for six months together , given by the sun in one continuous day , who does not , however , as some ignorant persons have asserted , conceal himself from the vernal equinox to autumn .
368 On the contrary , to these people there is but one rising of the sun for the year , and that at the summer solstice , and but one setting , at the winter solstice .
369 This region , warmed by the rays of the sun , is of a most delightful temperature , and exempt from every noxious blast .
370 The abodes of the natives are the woods and groves ; the gods receive their worship singly and in groups , while all discord and every kind of sickness are things utterly unknown .
371 Death comes upon them only when satiated with life ; after a career of feasting , in an old age sated with every luxury , they leap from a certain rock there into the sea ; and this they deem the most desirable mode of ending existence .
372 Some writers have placed these people , not in Europe , but at the very verge of the shores of Asia , because we find there a people called the Attacori , who greatly resemble them and occupy a very similar locality .
373 Other writers again have placed them midway between the two suns , at the spot where it sets to the Antipodes and rises to us ; a thing however that cannot possibly be , in consequence of the vast tract of sea which there intervenes .
374 Those writers who place them nowhere but under a day which lasts for six months , state that in the morning they sow , at mid-day they reap , at sunset they gather in the fruits of the trees , and during the night conceal themselves in caves .
375 Nor are we at liberty to entertain any doubts as to the existence of this race ; so many authors are there who assert that they were in the habit of sending their first-fruits to Delos to present them to Apollo , whom in especial they worship .
376 Virgins used to carry them , who for many years were held in high veneration , and received the rites of hospitality from the nations that lay on the route ; until at last , in consequence of repeated violations of good faith , the Hyperboreans came to the determination to deposit these offerings upon the frontiers of the people who adjoined them , and they in their turn were to convey them on to their neighbours , and so from one to the other , till they should have arrived at Delos .
377 However , this custom , even , in time fell into disuse .
378 § 4.26.7 The length of Sarmatia , Scythia , and Taurica , and of the whole of the region which extends from the river Borysthenes , is , according to Agrippa , 980 miles , and its breadth 717 .
379 I am of opinion , however , that in this part of the earth all estimates of measurement are exceedingly doubtful .
380 § 4.27.1 THE ISLANDS OF THE EUXINE .
381 THE ISLANDS OF THE NORTHERN OCEAN .
382 But now , in conformity with the plan which I originally proposed , the remaining portions of this gulf must be described .
383 As for its seas , we have already made mention of them .
384 § 4.27.2 The Hellespont has no islands belonging to Europe that are worthy of mention .
385 In the Euxine there are , at a distance of a mile and a half from the European shore , and of fourteen from the mouth of the Strait , the two Cyanaean islands , by some called the Symplegades , and stated in fabulous story to have run the one against the other ; the reason being the circumstance that they are separated by so short an interval , that while to those who enter the Euxine opposite to them they appear to be two distinct islands , but if viewed in a somewhat oblique direction they have the appearance of becoming gradually united into one .
386 On this side of the Ister there is the single island of the Apolloniates , eighty miles from the Thracian Bosporus ; it was from this place that M .
387 Lucullus brought the Capitoline Apollo .
388 Those islands which are to be found between the mouths of the Ister we have already mentioned .
389 Before the Borysthenes is Achillea previously referred to , known also by the names of Leuce and Macaron .
390 Researches which have been made at the present day place this island at a distance of 140 miles from the Borysthenes , of 120 from Tyra , and of fifty from the island of Peuce .
391 It is about ten miles in circumference .
392 The remaining islands in the Gulf of Carcinites are Cephalonnesos , Rhosphodusa , and Macra .
393 Before we leave the Euxine , we must not omit to notice the opinion expressed by many writers that all the interior seas take their rise in this one as the principal source , and not at the Straits of Gades .
394 The reason they give for this supposition is not an improbable one — the fact that the tide is always running out of the Euxine and that there is never any ebb .
395 § 4.27.3 We must now leave the Euxine to describe the outer portions of Europe .
396 After passing the Riphaean mountains we have now to follow the shores of the Northern Ocean on the left , until we arrive at Gades .
397 In this direction a great number of islands are said to exist that have no name ; among which there is one which lies opposite to Scythia , mentioned under the name of Raunonia , and said to be at a distance of the day 's sail from the mainland ; and upon which , according to Timaeus , amber is thrown up by the waves in the spring season .
398 As to the remaining parts of these shores , they are only known from reports of doubtful authority .
399 With reference to the Septentrional or Northern Ocean ; Hecataeus calls it , after we have passed the mouth of the river Parapanisus , where it washes the Scythian shores , the Amalchian sea , the word ' Amalchian ' signifying in the language of these races , frozen .
400 Philemon again says that it is called Morimarusa or the " Dead Sea " by the Cimbri , as far as the Promontory of Rubeas , beyond which it has the name of the Cronian Sea .
401 Xenophon of Lampsacus tells us that at a distance of three days' sail from the shores of Scythia , there is an island of immense size called Baltia , which by Pytheas is called Basilia .
402 Some islands called Oonae are said to be here , the inhabitants of which live on the eggs of birds and oats ; and others again upon which human beings are produced with the feet of horses , thence called Hippopodes .
403 Some other islands are also mentioned as those of the Panotii , the people of which have ears of such extraordinary size as to cover the rest of the body , which is otherwise left naked .
404 § 4.27.4 Leaving these however , we come to the nation of the Ingaevones , the first in Germany ; at which we begin to have some information upon which more implicit reliance can be placed .
405 In their country is an immense mountain called Sevo , not less than those of the Riphaean range , and which forms an immense gulf along the shore as far as the Promontory of the Cimbri .
406 This gulf , which has the name of the ' Codanian ,' is filled with islands ; the most famous among which is Scandinavia , of a magnitude as yet unascertained : the only portion of it at all known is inhabited by the nation of the Hilleviones , who dwell in 500 villages , and call it a second world : it is generally supposed that the island of Eningia is of not less magnitude .
407 Some writers state that these regions , as far as the river Vistula , are inhabited by the Sarmati , the Venedi , the Sciri , and the Hirri , and that there is a gulf there known by the name of Cylipenus , at the mouth of which is the island of Latris , after which comes another gulf , that of Lagnus , which borders on the Cimbri .
408 The Cimbrian Promontory , running out into the sea for a great distance , forms a peninsula which bears the name of Cartris .
409 Passing this coast , there are three and twenty islands which have been made known by the Roman arms : the most famous of which is Burcana , called by our people Fabaria , from the resemblance borne by a fruit which grows there spontaneously .
410 There are those also called Glaesaria by our soldiers , from their amber ; but by the barbarians they are known as Austeravia and Actania .
411 § 4.28.1 GERMANY : The whole of the shores of this sea as far as the Scaldis , a river of Germany , is inhabited by nations , the dimensions of whose respective territories it is quite impossible to state , so immensely do the authors differ who have touched upon this subject .
412 The Greek writers and some of our own countrymen have stated the coast of Germany to be 2500 miles in extent , while Agrippa , comprising Rhaetia and Noricum in his estimate , makes the length to be 686 miles , and the breadth 148 .
413 The breadth of Rhaetia alone however very nearly exceeds that number of miles , and indeed we ought to state that it was only subjugated at about the period of the death of that general ; while as for Germany , the whole of it was not thoroughly known to us for many years after his time .
414 If I may be allowed to form a conjecture , the margin of the coast will be found to be not far short of the estimate of the Greek writers , while the distance in a straight line will nearly correspond with that mentioned by Agrippa .
415 § 4.28.2 There are five German races ; the Vandili , parts of whom are the Burgundiones , the Varini , the Carini , and the Gutones : the Ingaevones , forming a second race , a portion of whom are the Cimbri , the Teutoni , and the tribes of the Chauci .
416 The Istaevones , who join up to the Rhine , and to whom the Cimbri belong , are the third race ; while the Hermiones , forming a fourth , dwell in the interior , and include the Suevi , the Hermunduri , the Chatti , and the Cherusci : the fifth race is that of the Peucini , who are also the Basternae , adjoining the Daci previously mentioned .
417 The more famous rivers that flow into the ocean are the Guttalus , the Vistillus or Vistula , the Albis , the Visurgis , the Amisius , the Rhine , and the Mosa .
418 In the interior is the long extent of the Hercynian range , which in grandeur is inferior to none .
419 § 4.29.1 NINETY-SIX ISLANDS OF THE GALLIC OCEAN .
420 In the Rhine itself , nearly 100 miles in length , is the most famous island of the Batavi and the Canninefates , as also other islands of the Frisii , the Chauci , the Frisiabones , the Sturii , and the Marsacii , which lie between Helium and Flevum .
421 These are the names of the mouths into which the Rhine divides itself , discharging its waters on the north into the lakes there , and on the west into the river Mosa .
422 At the middle mouth which lies between these two , the river , having but a very small channel , preserves its own name .
423 § 4.30.1 BRITANNIA : Opposite to this coast is the island called Britannia , so celebrated in the records of Greece and of our own country .
424 It is situate to the north-west , and , with a large tract of intervening sea , lies opposite to Germany , Gaul , and Spain , by far the greater part of Europe .
425 Its former name was Albion ; but at a later period , all the islands , of which we shall just now briefly make mention , were included under the name of " Britanniae .
426 " This island is distant from Gesoriacum , on the coast of the nation of the Morini , at the spot where the passage across is the shortest , fifty miles .
427 Pytheas and Isidorus say that its circumference is 4875 miles .
428 It is barely thirty years since any extensive knowledge of it was gained by the successes of the Roman arms , and even as yet they have not penetrated beyond the vicinity of the Caledonian forest .
429 Agrippa believes its length to be 800 miles , and its breadth 300 ; he also thinks that the breadth of Hibernia is the same , but that its length is less by 200 miles .
430 This last island is situate beyond Britannia , the passage across being the shortest from the territory of the Silures , a distance of thirty miles .
431 Of the remaining islands none is said to have a greater circumference than 125 miles .
432 Among these there are the Orcades , forty in number , and situate within a short distance of each other , the seven islands called Acmodae , the Haebudes , thirty in number , and , between Hibernia and Britannia , the islands of Mona , Monapia , Ricina , Vectis , Limnus , and Andros .
433 Below it are the islands called Samnis and Axantos , and opposite , scattered in the German Sea , are those known as the Glaesariae , but which the Greeks have more recently called the Electrides , from the circumstance of their producing electrum or amber .
434 The most remote of all that we find mentioned is Thule , in which , as we have previously stated , there is no night at the summer solstice , when the sun is passing through the sign of Cancer , while on the other hand at the winter solstice there is no day .
435 Some writers are of opinion that this state of things lasts for six whole months together .
436 Timaeus the historian says that an island called Mictisis within six days' sail of Britannia , in which white load is found ; and that the Britons sail over to it in boats of osier , covered with sewed hides .
437 There are writers also who make mention of some other islands : Scandia , Dumna , Bergos , and , greater than all , Nerigos , from which persons embark for Thule .
438 At one day 's sail from Thule is the frozen ocean , which by some is called the Cronian Sea .
439 § 4.31.1 GALLIA BELGICA : The whole of Gaul that is comprehended under the one general name of Comata , is divided into three races of people , which are more especially kept distinct from each other by the following rivers .
440 From the Scaldis to the Sequana it is Belgic Gaul ; from the Sequana to the Garumna it is Celtic Gaul or Lugdunensis ; and from the Garumna to the promontory of the Pyrenaean range it is Aquitanian Gaul , formerly called Aremorica .
441 Agrippa makes the entire length of the coast of Gaul to be 1800 miles , measured from the Rhine to the Pyrenees : and its length , from the ocean to the mountains of Cebenna and Jura , excluding there from Gallia Narbonensis , he computes at 420 miles , the breadth being 318 .
442 § 4.31.2 Beginning at the Scaldis , the parts beyond are inhabited by the Toxandri , who are divided into various peoples with many names ; after whom come the Menapii , the Morini , the Oromarsaci , who are adjacent to the burgh which is known as Gesoriacum , the Britanni , the Ambiani , the Bellovaci , the Hassi , and , more in the interior , the Catoslugi , the Atrebates , the Nervii , a free people , the Veromandui , the Suaeuconi , the Suessiones , a free people , the Ulmanetes , a free people , the Tungri , the Sunuci , the Frisiabones , the Betasi , the Leuci , a free people , the Treveri , who were formerly free , and the Lingones , a federal state , the federal Remi , the Mediomatrici , the Sequani , the Raurici , and the Helvetii .
443 The Roman colonies are Equestris and Rauriaca .
444 The nations of Germany which dwell in this province , near the sources of the Rhine , are the Nemetes , the Triboci , and the Vangiones ; nearer again , the Ubii , Colonia Agrippinensis , the Cugerni , the Batavi , and the peoples whom we have already mentioned as dwelling on the islands of the Rhine .
445 § 4.32.1 GALLIA LUGDUNENSIS : That part of Gaul which is known as Lugdunensis contains the Lexovii , the Vellocasses , the Galeti , the Veneti , the Abrincatui , the Ossismi , and the celebrated river Ligeris , as also a most remarkable peninsula , which extends into the ocean at the extremity of the territory of the Ossismi , the circumference of which is 625 miles , and its breadth at the neck 125 .
446 Beyond this are the Nannetes , and in the interior are the Aedui , a federal people , the Carnuti , a federal people , the Boii , the Senones , the Aulerci , both those surnamed Eburovices and those called Cenomanni , the Meldi , a free people , the Parisii , the Tricasses , the Andecavi , the Viducasses , the Bodiocasses , the Venelli , the Cariosvelites , the Diablinti , the Rhedones , the Turones , the Atesui , and the Secusiani , a free people , in whose territory is the colony of Lugdunum .
447 § 4.33.1 GALLIA AQUITANICA : In Aquitanica are the Ambilatri , the Anagnutes , the Pictones , the Santoni , a free people , the Bituriges , surnamed Vivisci , the Aquitani , from whom the province derives its name , the Sediboviates , the Convenae , who together form one town , the Begerri , the Tarbelli Quatuorsignani , the Cocosates Sexsignani , the Venami , the Onobrisates , the Belendi , and then the Pyrenaean range .
448 Below these are the Monesi , the Oscidates a mountain race , the Sibyllates , the Camponi , the Bercorcates , the Pindedunni , the Lassunni , the Vellates , the Tornates , the Consoranni , the Ausci , the Elusates , the Sottiates , the Oscidates Campestres , the Succasses , the Tarusates , the Basabocates , the Vassei , the Sennates , and the Cambolectri Agessinates .
449 Joining up to the Pictones are the Bituriges , a free people , who are also known as the Cubi , and then the Lemovices , the Arverni , a free people , and the Gabales .
450 § 4.33.2 Again , adjoining the province of Narbonensis are the Ruteni , the Cadurci , the Nitiobriges , and the Petrocori , separated by the river Tarnis from the Tolosani .
451 The seas around the coast are the Northern Ocean , flowing up to the mouth of the Rhine , the Britannic Ocean between the Rhine and the Sequana , and , between it and the Pyrenees , the Gallic Ocean .
452 There are many islands belonging to the Veneti , which bear the name of " Veneticae ," as also in the Aquitanic Gulf , that of Uliarus .
453 § 4.34.1 NEARER SPAIN , ITS COAST ALONG THE GALLIC OCEAN : At the Promontory of the Pyrenees Spain begins , more narrow , not only than Gaul , but even than itself in its other parts , as we have previously mentioned , seeing to what an immense extent it is here hemmed in by the ocean on the one side , and by the Iberian Sea on the other .
454 A chain of the Pyrenees , extending from due east to south-west , divides Spain into two parts , the smaller one to the north , the larger to the south .
455 The first coast that presents itself is that of the Nearer Spain , otherwise called Tarraconensis .
456 On leaving the Pyrenees and proceeding along the coast , we meet with the forest ranges of the Vascones , Olarso , the towns of the Varduli , the Morosgi , Menosca , Vesperies , and the Port of Amanus , where now stands the colony of Flaviobriga .
457 We then come to the district of the nine states of the Cantabri , the river Sauga , and the Port of Victoria of the Juliobrigenses , from which place the sources of the Iberus are distant forty miles .
458 We next come to the Port of Blendium , the Orgenomesci , a people of the Cantabri , Vereasueca their port , the country of the Astures , the town of Noega , and on a peninsula , the Paesici .
459 Next to these we have , belonging to the jurisdiction of Lucus , after passing the river Navilubio , the Cibarci , the Egovarri , surnamed Namarini , the Iadoni , the Arrotrebae , the Celtic Promontory , the rivers Florius and Nelo , the Celtici , surnamed Neri , and above them the Tamarici , in whose peninsula are the three altars called Sestianae , and dedicated to Augustus ; the Capori , the town of Noela , the Celtici surnamed Praesamarci , and the Cilen : of the islands , those worthy of mention are Corticata and Aunios .
460 After passing the Cileni , belonging to the jurisdiction of the Bracari , we have the Heleni , the Gravii , and the fortress of Tyde , all of them deriving their origin from the Greeks .
461 Also , the islands called Cicae , the famous city of Abobrica , the river Minius , four miles wide at its mouth , the Leuni , the Seurbi , and Augusta , a town of the Bracari , above whom lies Gallaecia .
462 We then come to the river Limia , and the river Durius , one of the largest in Spain , and which rises in the district of the Pelendones , passes near Numantia , and through the Arevaci and the Vaccaei , dividing the Vettones from Asturia , the Gallaeci from Lusitania , and separating the Turduli from the Bracari .
463 The whole of the region here mentioned from the Pyrenees is full of mines of gold , silver , iron , and lead , both black and white .
464 § 4.35.1 LUSITANIA : After passing the Durius , Lusitania begins .
465 We here have the ancient Turduli , the Paesuri , the river Vaga , the town of Talabrica , the town and river of Aeminium , the towns of Conimbrica , Collippo , and Eburobritium .
466 A promontory then advances into the sea in shape of a large horn ; by some it has been called Artabrum , by others the Great Promontory , while many call it the Promontory of Olisipo , from the city near it .
467 This spot forms a dividing line in the land , the sea , and the heavens .
468 Here ends one side of Spain ; and , when we have doubled the promontory , the front of Spain begins .
469 On one side of it lie the North and the Gallic Ocean , on the other the West and the Atlantic .
470 The length of this promontory has been estimated by some persons at sixty miles , by others at ninety .
471 A considerable number of writers estimate the distance from this spot to the Pyrenees at 1250 miles ; and , committing a manifest error , place here the nation of the Artabri , a nation that never was here .
472 For , making a slight change in the name , they have placed at this spot the Arrotrebae , whom we have previously spoken of as dwelling in front of the Celtic Promontory .
473 § 4.35.2 Mistakes have also been made as to the more celebrated rivers .
474 From the Minius , which we have previously mentioned , according to Varro , the river Aeminius is distant 200 miles , which others suppose to be situate elsewhere , and called Limaea .
475 By the ancients it was called the " River of Lethe ," and it has been made the subject of many fabulous stories .
476 At a distance of 200 miles from the Durius is the Tagus , the Munda lying between them .
477 The Tagus is famous for its golden sands .
478 At a distance of 160 miles from it is the Sacred Promontory , projecting from nearly the very middle of the front of Spain .
479 From this spot to the middle of the Pyrenees , Varro says , is a distance of 1400 miles ; while to the Anas , by which we have mentioned Lusitania as being separated from Baetica , is 126 miles , it being 102 more to Gades .
480 § 4.35.3 The peoples are the Celtici , the Turduli , and , about the Tagus , the Vettones .
481 From the river Anas to the Sacred Promontory are the Lusitani .
482 The cities worthy of mention on the coast , beginning from the Tagus , are that of Olisipo , famous for its mares , which conceive from the west wind ; Salacia , which is surnamed the Imperial City ; Merobrica ; and then the Sacred Promontory , with the other known by the name of Cuneus , and the towns of Ossonoba , Balsa , and Myrtili .
483 § 4.35.4 The whole of this province is divided into three jurisdictions , those of Emerita , Pax , and Scalabis .
484 It contains in all forty-six peoples , among whom there are five colonies , one municipal town of Roman citizens , three with the ancient Latin rights , and thirty-six that are tributaries .
485 The colonies are those of Augusta Emerita , situate on the river Anas , Metallinum , Pax , and Norba , surnamed Caesariana .
486 To this last place of jurisdiction the people of Castra Servilia and Castra Caecilia resort .
487 The fifth jurisdiction is that of Scalabis , which also has the name of Praesidium Julium .
488 Olisipo , surnamed Felicitas Julia , is a municipal city , whose inhabitants enjoy the rights of Roman citizens .
489 The towns in the enjoyment of the ancient Latin rights are Ebora , which also has the name of Liberalitas Julia , and Myrtili and Salacia , which we have previously mentioned .
490 Those among the tributaries whom it may not be amiss to mention , in addition to those already alluded to among the names of those in Baetica , are the Augustobrigenses , the Ammienses , the Aranditani , the Arabricenses , the Balsenses , the Cesarobricenses , the Caperenses , the Caurenses , the Colarni , the Cibilitani , the Concordienses , the Elbocorii , the Interannienses , the Lancienses , the Mirobrigenses , surnamed Celtici , the Medubrigenses , surnamed Plumbarii , the Ocelenses or Lancienses , the Turduli , also called Barduli , and the Tapori .
491 Agrippa states , that Lusitania , with Asturia and Gallaecia , is 540 miles in length , and 536 in breadth .
492 The provinces of Spain , measured from the two extreme promontories of the Pyrenees , along the sea-line of the entire coast , are thought to be 3922 miles in circumference ; while some writers make them to be but 2600 .
493 § 4.36.1 THE ISLANDS IN THE ATLANTIC OCEAN : Opposite to Celtiberia are a number of islands , by the Greeks called Cassiterides , in consequence of their abounding in tin : and , facing the Promontory of the Arrotrebae , are the six Islands of the Gods , which some persons have called the Fortunate Islands .
494 At the very commencement of Baetica , and twenty-five miles from the mouth of the Straits of Gades , is the island of Gadis , twelve miles long and three broad , as Polybius states in his writings .
495 At its nearest part , it is less than 700 feet distant from the mainland , while in the remaining portion it is distant more than seven miles .
496 Its circuit is fifteen miles , and it has on it a city which enjoys the rights of Roman citizens , and whose people are called the Augustani of the city of Julia Gaditana .
497 On the side which looks towards Spain , at about 100 paces distance , is another long island , three miles wide , on which the original city of Gades stood .
498 By Ephorus and Philistides it is called Erythia , by Timaeus and Silenus Aphrodisias , and by the natives the Isle of Juno .
499 Timaeus says , that the larger island used to be called Cotinusa , from its olives ; the Romans call it Tartessos ; the Carthaginians Gadir , that word in the Punic language signifying a hedge .
500 It was called Erythia because the Tyrians , the original ancestors of the Carthaginians , were said to have come from the Erythraean , or Red Sea .
501 In this island Geryon is by some thought to have dwelt , whose herds were carried off by Hercules .
502 Other persons again think , that his island is another one , opposite to Lusitania , and that it was there formerly called by that name .
503 § 4.37.1 THE GENERAL MEASUREMENT OF EUROPE : Having thus made the circuit of Europe , we must now give the complete measurement of it , in order that those who wish to be acquainted with this subject may not feel themselves at a loss .
504 Artemidorus and Isidorus have given its length , from the Tanais to Gades , as 8214 miles .
505 Polybius in his writings has stated the breadth of Europe , in a line from Italy to the ocean , to be 1150 miles .
506 But , even in his day , its magnitude was but little known .
507 The distance of Italy , as we have previously stated , as far as the Alps , is 1120 miles , from which , through Lugdunum to the British port of the Morini , the direction which Polybius seems to follow , is 1168 miles .
508 But the better ascertained , though greater length , is that taken from the Alps through the Camp of the Legions in Germany , in a north-westerly direction , to the mouth of the Rhine , being 1543 miles .
509 We shall now have to speak of Africa and Asia .
